GOOGLE DATA ANALYTICS
Course 1– Foundations: Data, Data, Everywhere
1. Introducing data analytics: Data helps us make decisions, in everyday life and in 
business. In this first part of the course, you will learn how data analysts use tools of 
their trade to inform those decisions. You will also get to know more about this course 
and the overall program expectations.
2. Thinking analytically: Data analysts balance many different roles in their work. In 
this part of the course, you will learn about some of these roles and the key skills that 
are required. You will also explore analytical thinking and how it relates to datadriven decision making.
3. Exploring the wonderful world of data: Data has its own life cycle, and data 
analysts use an analysis process that cuts across and leverages this life cycle. In this 
part of the course, you will learn about the data life cycle and data analysis process. 
They are both relevant to your work in this program and on the job as a future data 
analyst. You will be introduced to applications that help guide data through the data 
analysis process.
4. Setting up a data toolbox: Spreadsheets, query languages, and data visualization 
tools are all a big part of a data analyst’s job. In this part of the course, you will learn 
the basic concepts to use them for data analysis. You will understand how they work 
through examples provided.
5. Discovering data career possibilities: All kinds of businesses value the work that 
data analysts do. In this part of the course, you will examine different types of 
businesses and the jobs and tasks that analysts do for them. You will also learn how a 
Google Data Analytics Certificate will help you meet many of the requirements for a 
position with these organizations.
6. Completing the Course Challenge: At the end of this course, you will be able to put 
everything you have learned into perspective with the Course Challenge. The Course 
Challenge will ask you questions about the main concepts you have learned and then 
give you an opportunity to apply those concepts in two scenarios.
Week – 1 Introducing Data Analytics
Data
Data is a collection of facts that can be used to draw conclusions, make predictions, 
and assist in decision-making.
Data Analysis
Data analysis is the collection, transformation, and organization of data in order to 
draw conclusions, make predictions, and drive informed decision-making.
The six steps of the data analysis process are(data analysis life cycle):
• Ask questions and define the problem.
• Prepare data by collecting and storing the information.
GOOGLE DATA ANALYTICS
• Process data by cleaning and checking the information. Data cleaning is the 
process of fixing or removing incorrect, corrupted, incorrectly formatted, 
duplicate, or incomplete data within a dataset.
• Analyze data to find patterns, relationships, and trends.
• Share data with your audience.
• Act on the data and use the analysis results.
People Analytics
Human resources analytics/Workforce analytics. It is the practice of collecting and 
analyzing data on the people who make up a company’s workforce in order to gain 
insights to improve how the company operates.
Data science, the discipline of making data useful, is an umbrella term that 
encompasses three disciplines: machine learning, statistics, and analytics. These 
are separated by how many decisions you know you want to make before you begin 
with them.
If you want to make a few important decisions under uncertainty, that is statistics. 
The excellence of statistics is rigor. They are very, very careful about protecting 
decision-makers from coming to the wrong conclusion.
If you want to automate, in other words, make many, many, many decisions under 
uncertainty, that is machine learning and AI. Performance is the excellence of the 
machine learning and AI engineer.
But what if you don't know how many decisions you want to make before you begin? 
What if what you're looking for is inspiration? You want to encounter your unknown 
unknowns. You want to understand your world. That is analytics. The excellence of an 
analyst is speed. How quickly can you surf through vast amounts of data to explore it 
and discover the gems, the beautiful potential insights that are worth knowing about 
and bringing to your decision-makers
GOOGLE DATA ANALYTICS
Data Ecosystem
An ecosystem is a group of elements that interact with one another.
Data ecosystems are made up of various elements that interact with one another in 
order to produce, manage, store, organize, analyze, and share data. These elements 
include hardware and software tools, and the people who use them.
For example, you could tap into your retail store's database, which is an ecosystem 
filled with customer names, addresses, previous purchases, and customer reviews.
Data Science
Data science is defined as creating new ways of modeling and understanding the 
unknown by using raw data.
Data scientists create new questions using data, while analysts find answers to 
existing questions by creating insights from data sources.
Data Analytics
Data analytics in the simplest terms is the science of data.
It's a very broad concept that encompasses everything from the job of managing and 
using data to the tools and methods that data workers use each and every day.
Data, data analysis and the data ecosystem, all fit under the data analytics umbrella.
Data-driven Decision-making
Using facts to guide business strategy.
The first step in data-driven decision-making is figuring out the business need.
Data alone will never be as powerful as data combined with human experience, 
observation, and sometimes even intuition. To get the most out of data-driven 
decision-making, it's important to include insights from people who are familiar with 
GOOGLE DATA ANALYTICS
the business problem. These people are called subject matter experts, and they 
have the ability to look at the results of data analysis and identify any inconsistencies, 
make sense of gray areas, and eventually validate choices being made.
Gut Instinct
Gut instinct is an intuitive understanding of something with little or no explanation. 
This isn’t always something conscious; we often pick up on signals without even 
realizing. You just have a “feeling” it’s right.
Blending data with business knowledge, plus maybe a touch of gut instinct, will be a 
common part of your process as a junior data analyst. The key is figuring out the 
exact mix for each particular project. A lot of times, it will depend on the goals of 
your analysis.
At the heart of data-driven decision-making is data, so analysts are most effective 
when they ensure that facts are driving strategy.
Data Analysis Life Cycle
The process of going from data to decision.
Data goes through several phases as it gets created, consumed, tested, processed, 
and reused. With a life cycle model, all key team members can drive success by 
planning work both up front and at the end of the data analysis process. While the 
data analysis life cycle is well known among experts, there isn't a single defined 
structure of those phases. There might not be one single architecture that’s uniformly 
followed by every data analysis expert, but there are some shared fundamentals in 
every data analysis process.
Glossary
GOOGLE DATA ANALYTICS
Week 2 – All about analytical thinking
Analytical Skills
Analytical skills are qualities and characteristics associated with solving problems 
using facts.
Five essential aspects to analytical skills:
1. Curiosity
o It is all about wanting to learn something.
2. Understanding context
o Context is the condition in which something exists or happens. This can be a 
structure or an environment.
o Grouping things into categories.
o Understanding where information fits into the “big picture”.
3. Having technical mindset
o The ability to break things down into smaller steps or pieces and work with 
them in an orderly and logical way.
4. Data design
o Data design is how you organize information.
5. Data strategy
o Data strategy is the management of the people, processes, and tools used in 
data analysis.
Data-driven decision-making involves curiosity, understanding context, having a 
technical mindset, data design, and data strategy.
Analytical Thinking
Analytical thinking involves identifying and defining a problem and then solving it by 
using data in an organized, step-by-step manner.
Five key aspects to analytical thinking:
1. Visualization
o The graphical representation of information.
o To understand and explain information more effectively.
2. Strategy
o Strategizing helps data analysts see what they want to achieve with the data 
and how they can get there. Strategy also helps improve the quality and 
GOOGLE DATA ANALYTICS
usefulness of the data we collect. By strategizing, we know all our data is 
valuable and can help us accomplish our goals.
3. Problem-orientation
o Data analysts use a problem- oriented approach in order to identify, describe, 
and solve problems. It's all about keeping the problem top of mind 
throughout the entire project.
4. Correlation
o Being able to identify a relationship between two or more pieces of data.
o Correlation does not equal causation. In other words, just because two pieces 
of data are both trending in the same direction, that doesn't necessarily mean 
they are all related.
5. Big-picture and detail-oriented thinking.
o Being able to see the big picture as well as the details.
o Detail-oriented thinking is all about figuring out all of the aspects that will 
help you execute a plan.
The more ways you can think, the easier it is to think outside the box and come up 
with fresh ideas.
You need to think critically to find out the right questions to ask.
You also need to think creatively to get new and unexpected answers.
Root cause (What is the root cause of a problem?)
A root cause is the reason why a problem occurs. If we can identify and get rid of a 
root cause, we can prevent that problem from happening again.
5 whys
In the Five Whys you ask "why" five times to reveal the root cause. The fifth and final 
answer should give you some useful and sometimes surprising insights.
The Five Whys process is used to reveal a root cause of a problem through the 
answer to the fifth question.
GOOGLE DATA ANALYTICS
Gap analysis (Where are the gaps in our process?)
Gap analysis is a method for examining and evaluating how a process works currently 
in order to get where you want to be in the future. Improving accessibility, increasing 
efficiency, and reducing carbon emissions are examples of improvements that gap 
analysis can help accomplish.
The general approach to gap analysis is understanding where you are now compared 
to where you want to be. Then you can identify the gaps that exist between the 
current and future state and determine how to bridge them.
(What did we not consider before?)
This is a great way to think about what information or procedure might be missing 
from a process, so you can identify ways to make better decisions and strategies 
moving forward.
Quartile
A quartile divides data points into four equal parts or quarters.
GOOGLE DATA ANALYTICS
Week3-The wonderful world of data
Data life cycle
The entire period of time that data exists in the system.
Six stages of data life cycle:
1. Plan: During planning, a business decides what kind of data it needs, how it will be 
managed throughout its life cycle, who will be responsible for it, and the optimal 
outcomes.
2. Capture: This is where data is collected from a variety of different sources and 
brought into the organization.
3. Manage: How we care for our data, how and where it's stored, the tools used to keep 
it safe and secure, and the actions taken to make sure that it's maintained properly.
4. Analyze: In this phase, the data is used to solve problems, make great decisions, and 
support business goals. A data analyst might use formulas to perform calculations, 
create a report from the data, or use spreadsheets to aggregate data.
5. Archive: Keep relevant data stored for long-term and future reference.
6. Destroy: Remove data from storage and delete any shared copies of the data. This is 
important for protecting a company's private information, as well as private data 
about its customers.
Individual stages in the data life cycle will vary from company to company or by 
industry or sector. Although data life cycles vary, one data management principle is 
universal. Govern how data is handled so that it is accurate, secure, and available to 
meet your organization's needs.
Stakeholders
They are people who have invested time and resources into a project and are 
interested in the outcome.
GOOGLE DATA ANALYTICS
Data analyst tools
Spreadsheet
A spreadsheet is a digital worksheet. It stores, organizes, and sorts data. This is 
important because the usefulness of your data depends on how well it's structured. 
When you put your data into a spreadsheet, you can see patterns, group information 
and easily find the information you need. Some popular spreadsheets are Microsoft 
Excel and Google Sheets. Spreadsheets also have some really useful features 
called formulas and functions.
• A formula is a set of instructions that performs a specific calculation using the data 
in a spreadsheet.
• A function is a preset command that automatically performs a specific process or 
task using the data in a spreadsheet.
GOOGLE DATA ANALYTICS
Spreadsheets structure data in a meaningful way by letting you:
• Collect, store, organize, and sort information
• Identify patterns and piece the data together in a way that works for each specific 
data project
• Create excellent data visualizations, like graphs and charts.
Query language
A query language is a computer programming language that allows you to retrieve 
and manipulate data from a database.
SQL is a language that lets data analysts communicate with a database. 
A database is a collection of data stored in a computer system. With SQL, data 
analysts can access the data they need by making a query. Some popular Structured 
Query Language (SQL) programs include MySQL, Microsoft SQL Server, 
and BigQuery.
Query languages:
• Allow analysts to isolate specific information from a database(s)
• Make it easier for you to learn and understand the requests made to databases
• Allow analysts to select, create, add, or download data from a database for analysis
Data visualization
Data visualization is the graphical representation of information. Some examples 
include graphs, maps, and tables. They help data analysts communicate their insights 
to others, in an effective and compelling way. Some popular visualization tools 
are Tableau and Looker.
These tools:
• Turn complex numbers into a story that people can understand
• Help stakeholders come up with conclusions that lead to informed decisions and 
effective business strategies
• Have multiple features:
o Tableau's simple drag-and-drop feature lets users create interactive graphs in 
dashboards and worksheets.
o Looker communicates directly with a database, allowing you to connect your 
data right to the visual tool you choose.
GOOGLE DATA ANALYTICS
A career as a data analyst also involves using programming languages, like R and 
Python, which are used a lot for statistical analysis, visualization, and other data 
analysis.
• What is the relationship between the data life cycle and the data analysis 
process? How are the two processes similar? How are they different?
o The data life cycle involves stages for identifying needs and managing 
data. Data analysis involves process steps to make meaning from data.
o While the data analysis process will drive your projects and help you 
reach your business goals, you must understand the life cycle of your 
data in order to use that process. To analyze your data well, you need 
to have a thorough understanding of it. Similarly, you can collect all the 
data you want, but the data is only useful to you if you have a plan for 
analyzing it.
• What is the relationship between the Ask phase of the data analysis process 
and the Plan phase of the data life cycle? How are they similar? How are they 
different?
o The Plan and Ask phases both involve planning and asking questions, 
but they tackle different subjects. The Ask phase in the data analysis 
process focuses on big-picture strategic thinking about business goals. 
However, the Plan phase focuses on the fundamentals of the project, 
such as what data you have access to, what data you need, and where 
you’re going to get it.
Week4-Set up your toolbox
Spreadsheet basics
A spreadsheet helps you structure data in rows and columns, prepare data for analysis, and 
create custom data visualizations. The chart editor enables data analysts to choose the type 
of chart you're making and customize its appearance. To better analyze your data, clean up 
GOOGLE DATA ANALYTICS
your chart to make it more visually appealing and to clarify what data means by making your 
chart more descriptive. To do that, it’s important to add chart titles and axis titles.
Data Visualization
Data analysts use data visualizations to explain complex data quickly, reinforce data 
analysis, and create interesting graphs and charts. Data visualizations can clearly 
demonstrate patterns and trends, help stakeholders understand complex data more 
quickly, and illustrate relationships between data points.
Misc: A line chart is effective for tracking trends over time. A pie chart shows how a 
whole is broken down into parts.
Steps to plan a data visualization:
i. Explore the data for patterns
ii. Plan your visuals: Refine the data and present the results of your analysis. You will 
want to create a data visualization that explains your findings quickly and effectively 
to your target audience.
iii. Create your visuals: Now that you have decided what kind of information and 
insights you want to display, it is time to start creating the actual visualizations. Keep 
in mind that creating the right visualization for a presentation or to share with 
stakeholders is a process. It involves trying different visualization formats and making 
adjustments until you get what you are looking for. In this case, a mix of different 
visuals will best communicate your findings and turn your analysis into the most 
compelling story for stakeholders.
Data visualization toolkit
• Spreadsheets: Spreadsheets are great for creating simple visualizations like bar 
graphs and pie charts, and even provide some advanced visualizations like maps, and 
waterfall and funnel diagrams.
• Visualization software (Tableau): Tableau is a popular data visualization tool that 
lets you pull data from nearly any system and turn it into compelling visuals or 
actionable insights. The platform offers built-in visual best practices, which makes 
analyzing and sharing data fast, easy, and (most importantly) useful. Tableau works 
well with a wide variety of data and includes an interactive dashboard that lets you 
and your stakeholders click to explore the data interactively. Start exploring Tableau 
from the How-to Video resources.
• Programming language (R with RStudio): As with Tableau, you can create 
dashboard-style data visualizations using RStudio. Resources: RStudio, RStudio 
Cheatsheets, RStudio Visualize Data Primer.
GOOGLE DATA ANALYTICS
Week5-Endless career possibilities
Data analytics helps businesses make better decisions, but getting there is a process. 
It begins with analyzing a business problem, identifying data about that problem, 
and then using data analysis to arrive at an answer. Sometimes you get an answer 
that solves your business problem, but it’s often just as likely that you discover other 
questions to investigate further.
Businesses using data analytics have a common theme. They all have issues to 
explore, questions to answer, or problems to solve.
• An issue is a topic or subject to investigate.
• A question is designed to discover information.
• A problem is an obstacle or complication that needs to be worked out.
These questions and problems become the foundation for all kinds of business tasks, 
that you'll help solve as a data analyst. A business task is the question or problem 
data analysis answers for a business. Data analytics helps businesses make better 
decisions. It all starts with a business task and the question it's trying to answer.
Data analysts have an important responsibility: making sure that their analyses are 
fair (ensuring that analysis does not create or reinforce bias requires using processes 
and systems that are fair and inclusive to everyone). Fairness means ensuring that 
your analysis doesn't create or reinforce bias. It's important to think about fairness 
from the moment you start collecting data for a business task to the time you 
present your conclusions to your stakeholders. Considering inclusive sample 
populations, social context, and self-reported data enable fairness in data collection.
A case study:
1. To improve the effectiveness of its teaching staff, the administration of a high school 
offered the opportunity for all teachers to participate in a workshop. They were not 
required to attend; instead, the administration encouraged teachers to sign up. Of 
the 43 teachers on staff, 19 chose to take the workshop.
At the end of the academic year, the administration collected data on teacher 
performance for all teachers on staff. The data was collected via student survey. In the 
survey, students were asked to rank each teacher's effectiveness on a scale of 1 (very 
poor) to 6 (very good).
The administration compared data on teachers who attended the workshop to data 
on teachers who did not. The comparison revealed that teachers who attended the 
workshop had an average score of 4.95, while teachers who did not attend had an 
average score of 4.22. The administration concluded that the workshop was a 
success.
GOOGLE DATA ANALYTICS
• This is an example of unfair practice. It is tempting to conclude—as the 
administration did—that the workshop was a success. However, since the workshop 
was voluntary and not random, it is not appropriate to infer a causal relationship 
between attending the workshop and the higher rating.
The workshop might have been effective, but other explanations for the differences in 
the ratings cannot be ruled out. For example, another explanation could be that the 
staff volunteering for the workshop were the better, more motivated teachers. This 
group of teachers would be rated higher whether or not the workshop was effective.
It’s also notable that there is no direct connection between student survey responses 
and workshop attendance. The data analyst could correct this by asking for the 
teachers to be selected randomly to participate in the workshop. They could also 
collect data that measures something more directly related to workshop attendance, 
such as the success of a technique the teachers learned in that workshop.
Data analyst roles
The data analyst role is one of many job titles that contain the word “analyst.”
To name a few others that sound similar but may not be the same role:
• Business analyst — analyzes data to help businesses improve processes, products, or 
services
• Data analytics consultant — analyzes the systems and models for using data
• Data engineer — prepares and integrates data from different sources for analytical 
use
• Data scientist — uses expert skills in technology and social science to find trends 
through data analysis
• Data specialist — organizes or converts data for use in databases or software systems
• Operations analyst — analyzes data to assess the performance of business operations 
and workflows
Data analysts, data scientists, and data specialists sound very similar but focus on 
different tasks.
GOOGLE DATA ANALYTICS
Job Specializations
The role of data specialist (concentrates on in-depth knowledge of databases) is one 
of many specializations within data analytics. Other specialist roles for data analysts 
can focus on in-depth knowledge of specific industries.
Other industry-specific specialist positions that you might come across in your data 
analyst job search include:
• Marketing analyst — analyzes market conditions to assess the potential sales of 
products and services
• HR/payroll analyst — analyzes payroll data for inefficiencies and errors
• Financial analyst — analyzes financial status by collecting, monitoring, and reviewing 
data
• Risk analyst — analyzes financial documents, economic conditions, and client data to 
help companies determine the level of risk involved in making a particular business 
decision
• Healthcare analyst — analyzes medical data to improve the business aspect of 
hospitals and medical facilities
